Minimal protocol

The full WinBoard protocol, as described in the document

http://tim-mann.org/xboard/engine-intf.html

looks quite elaborate, but to interface an 
engine to WinBoard so you can play a game against it can already be 
done with the aid of a very small subset of the protocol. The other 
commands your engine can simply ignore.

This minimal subset consists of:

Commands that your engine should understand when it 
receives them on its standard input:
level
new
force
go
<MOVE>

where <MOVE> means the move in coordinate notation (4 characters, 
or 5 when a promotion is involved). Of this, the level command is 
the only one with numerical parameters (specifying nr of moves, 
time in minutes, and time-increment per move in seconds).

'new' tells your engine to setup the board for a new game, and 
consider itself playing the side that will not move first, simply 
awaiting events idly. This means it will start searching 
and doing a move of its own after it receives an input move.

After 'force' the engine will never do any moves itself, just 
accepting moves for the side that is to move, one after the other 
(keeping track of who is to move), and performing them 
on its internal board.

'go' tells the engine to start playing for the side that now has 
the move (regardless of what it was doing before), and keep 
spontaneously generating moves for that side each thime that side 
has to move again.

All other commands are best ignored without comment: officially 
you have to print an error message if the engine receives a 
command it does not understand, but if it understands only so 
little that would just confuse the GUI. So better save that for later.

commands that your engine has to send to the GUI, 
on its standard output:
move <MOVE>

The only thing you have to send the GUI is the moves, preceeded 
by the keyword 'move'. The engine only has to do it when the 
side it is playing (as told by the most recent 'new', 'force' 
or 'go' command) has to move.

As a general guideline, send as little as possible to the GUI. 
In the best case the GUI will ignore what it receives and doesn't 
understand. Sometimes it misunderstand engine output that 
is not a a command defined in the protocol. Certainly do not 
echo the moves that you receive as input. Be very careful in 
printing lines that contain the words 'black' or 'white', 
as the GUI might understand them as 'black wins' or 'white resigns', 
and forfeits the game for the engine. 

Be sure to flush the output after printing a move (it might be 
buffered otherwise until there is more, and then the engine starts 
waiting for an answer on a message that was never send 
to the GUI, and a deadlock occurs).


This is really all that is needed. Useful additions, however, 
would be for receiving:
quit		for decent termination of your engine, 
		rather than the GUI having to kill it.
time <t>        to synchronize the engines internal clock with that of the GUI,
                where <t> is the number of centi-seconds remaining on the clock
		so the engine would not have to keep track of this itself.
hard            tells your engine that it can ponder (use CPU time when the 
		opponent is to move).
easy            tells your engine that pondering is forbidden.

In the other direction, it would be good if the engine prints a 
result message when it stops playing for whatever reason:
1-0 {reason}		Side that moves first wins (white or sente)
0-1 {reason}		The other side wins
1/2-1/2 {reason}        Draw
The  reason can be any text you care to print. 


With the minimal set of commands, you can already start from set-up 
positions by feeding the engine all the moves leading to that position 
(e.g. through pasting a PGN into the GUI, or have the GUI read them 
from a PGN file). You might want to implement a way to set up positions 
without knowing the moves that lead to that position, though. There are 
two ways to do that. For the old way (in 'protocol 1') it should understand 
the 'edit' command. After it recieves a line with this command, it should 
get in a mode where it only accepts edit sub-menu commands, 
until it receives a line starting with a '.' (a single period).

The commands in edit mode are:
#		clear the board
P<sqr>		Put a piece of type P and the current color on square <sqr>
P<sqr>+		Same thing, but promote the piece as well
c		change the current color (after 'edit' the color is 'white')

The modern way to set up a position is to send a FEN to the engine, 
as part of a 'setboard' command:

setboard <FEN-string>

This sounds much simpler, (if your engine already contains a FEN parser) 
but unfortunately the GUI uses this way only if the engine has told it first 
that it wants to use protocol 2. To tell this, it has to send a 'feature' 
command to the GUI in reply to receiving the 'protover 2' command (send by 
the GUI during engine initialization).


So far the engine sent only the moves it decided to play to the GUI. 
(Perhaps apart from the 'feature' command if you want to use protocol 2.) 
You can also have it send what it is thinking about. But it should not do 
that without being told so. For that there are the commands:

post		turns printing status info while thinking or pondering on
nopost          turns it off

These command only have any use if you also implement the printing of the 
status info, in a strictly defined format. This output appears then in the 
line above the board display.
